## Atoms

Definition: An atom is the smallest part of an element which has the chemical properties of that element.

**Structure of an atom**
- the nucleus contains protons and neutrons packed tightly together
	- proton (p): relative mass **defined** to be 1, electric charge = +1
	- neutron (n): relative mass = 1, electric charge = 0
- electrons move very fast around the nucleus
	- electron ($e^-$): negligible mass, electric charge = -1

**Important:** an atom must be neutral, ie having the same number of protons and electrons

**Numbers describing an atom**
- **Atomic number (Z)** of an atom is the number or protons in the atom
	- each element has its own unique atomic number
- **Mass number (A)** of an atom is the sum of number of protons and neutrons in the atom
	- number of protons may **NOT** equal to number of neutrons, see isotopes below
The full atomic symbol: $^A_ZX$

## Isotopes

Definition: Isotopes are different atoms of the same element, with the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons.

**Important concept**
- We don't say "atom X is an isotope"
- Instead, we need to compare: "atom X and Y are isotopes"
- or, relative to an element: "atom Z is an isotope of hydrogen"

**Example: isotopes of hydrogen**

| Isotopes   | Mass number A | protons | neutrons | electrons |
| ---------- | ------------- | ------- | -------- | --------- |
| Hydrogen-1 | 1 (1+0)       | 1       | 0        | 1         |
| Hydrogen-2 | 2 (1+1)       | 1       | 1        | 1         |
| Hydrogen-3 | 3 (1+2)       | 1       | 2        | 1         |

Differences of isotopes
- Isotopes of the same element have the same number of protons and electrons in their atoms
	- They have the same chemical properties
- Isotopes of the same element have different number of neutrons
	- So they have different masses and hence slightly different physical properties

## Relative abundance
In most cases, isotopes of the same element have different abundance.

**Example: isotopes of carbon**

| Isotope   | Relative abundance in nature |
| --------- | ---------------------------- |
| Carbon-12 | 98.892%                      |
| Carbon-13 | 1.108%                       |
| Carbon-14 | very small %                 |

---

# *Examples*

**Answers at the bottom**
1. All atoms contain a nucleus. (T / F)
2. All atoms contain three kinds of particles. (T / F)
3. All atoms have no electrical charge. (T / F)
4. All atoms have the same amount of protons and neutrons. (T / F)
5. Most of the space inside an atom is occupied by the nucleus. (T / F)
6. Isotopes have the same number of electrons. (T / F)

---

7. A certain particle has 8 protons, 8 neutrons and 10 electrons. Is it an atom? Explain briefly.
	- No, it does not have the same number of protons and electrons. Its charge is not zero.

---
**Answer**
1. All atoms contain a nucleus. (T)
2. All atoms contain three kinds of particles. (F)
	- Hydrogen-1 does not have neutrons.
3. All atoms have no electrical charge. (T)
4. All atoms have the same amount of protons and neutrons. (F)
	- Isotopes!
5. Most of the space inside an atom is occupied by the nucleus. (F)
	- Most of the space is occupied by empty space; most of the **mass** is occupied by the nucleus.
6. Isotopes of the same element have the same number of electrons. (T)